this video is brought to you by my
patrons if you'd like to support my
channel and get access to extras like
audio commentaries a patron exclusive
podcast and uncut videos you can join by
clicking the link in the description
nostalgia has this weird grasp on our
society
it always has really but
recently it's gotten particularly
prevalent movies tv shows books even
politicians have been using nostalgia to
warm our thoughts to the good old days
make the days we
very well may not have been alive to see
seem like this perfect world we should
all wish to return to one of the biggest
shows to come out of the last decade
stranger things has been attributed by
viewers and media analysts alike
as being a huge catalyst for wave of
1980s nostalgia holding on to our member
berries with an iron grip stranger
things is set in the fictional rural
town of hawkins indiana during the 1980s
the nearby hawkins national laboratory
performs scientific research for the
united states department of energy but
secretly does experiments into the
paranormal and supernatural including
those that involve human test subjects
such as the show's lead character known
as eleven inadvertently they have
created a portal to the hellish
alternate dimension the upside down and
the influence of the upside down starts
to affect the residents of hawkins in
calamitous ways the first season begins
in november of 1983 with the
disappearance of will byers who is
abducted by a creature from the upside
down that his friends name the
demigorgon his mother joyce and the
town's police chief jim hopper lead a
mostly off-the-books investigation into
his disappearance
meanwhile eleven who has psionic powers
escapes from the laboratory and is found
by will's friends with everyone working
together they eventually rescue will and
defeat the demigorgon but not without
some of the upside down finding its way
into our world the second season is set
a year later when will begins having
premonitions of the fall of hawkins
caused by a creature in the upside down
that dwarfs the demigorgon of season 1.
when it is discovered that will is
possessed by the entity his friends and
family make a mad attempt at rescuing
him once again in the process
discovering the grave dangers that lurk
just below the surface of their small
town
season three expands the mythology as we
learn more about the creature believed
to be heading the forces of the upside
down the mind flare which makes its way
into our dimension by possessing and
destroying bodies its defeat is only a
momentary relief though as season 4
introduces us to the real big bad of the
series vecna an evil force 11 once
fought before but has grown much more
powerful since then it takes the
combined efforts of every lead and
supporting character on the show to
fight him only to end in a loss as his
plan comes to fruition as the upside
down begins to invade the real world
completely so from this albeit brief
description of events you might be
asking yourself where's the nostalgia in
that
who wants to remember going through
possession child abduction fighting
interdimensional demons and trauma with
a topping of more trauma good question
it's one i've been asking myself because
while some people love reliving the
1980s via the show a lot of other people
have sworn off the show because of it so
let's make like a cnn news anchor and
look at both sides figure out what
exactly is nostalgia
and
if stranger things is in the right side
up
or the upside down of it
[Music]
if we're going to talk about the
morality of nostalgia that is its moral
implications on our media landscape and
culture as a whole
we need to clearly outline what it is
but when it comes to nostalgia it's the
clarity part that's the problem when it
comes to words most people would agree
that consulting a dictionary is the
easiest way to define one the
merriam-webster dictionary defines
nostalgia as one a wistful or
excessively sentimental yearning for
return to or of some past period or
irrecoverable condition
also something that evokes nostalgia
and two
the state of being homesick the
cambridge dictionary defines it as a
feeling of pleasure and also slight
sadness when you think about things that
happened in the past neither of those
definitions are inherently wrong
but dictionaries often lack two things
first a description of how these
definitions ought to be applied in
colloquial language and second an
awareness of a given society's emotional
associations of the word take for
instance the word ultimate according to
traditional dictionary usage something
that is ultimate is the last entry in a
long and perhaps epic catalog the
ultimate letter of the alphabet is z but
in common uses it means something like
the best or the most powerful something
game-changing and dictionaries are often
very slow to catch up on expanding a
formal definition of a word to include
common uses however when it comes to
nostalgia we throw this word around a
lot the problem with these
aforementioned definitions is that they
treat nostalgia as a feeling
when it seems to be used to describe a
thing
this thing is nostalgic i would argue
that especially recently nostalgia can
be seen almost like a literary device
something that creators and producers
especially use in order to hone in on an
audience that is dissatisfied with the
current state of the world roughly
speaking in spite of nostalgia's focus
around a bittersweet recollection of the
past in most examples it's often used to
describe media that celebrates a
particular era in a culture's history
getting back to the question at hand is
stranger things nostalgia it does take
place in the 1980s and therefore as
historic fiction it is naturally going
to include aesthetics and objects from
the decade and therefore will
automatically remind people of the 1980s
and most people tend to have fond
memories of their childhood so yes it
can inspire that feeling but there is a
question about to what extent the series
leans on nostalgia as a reason to watch
his finger looking good is a glowing
rose-tinted depiction of the 80s all it
has to offer see back when season one
first came out i dodged it i read some
people saying they couldn't get through
the first season because they said it
was just nostalgia bait and nothing more
it wasn't until the second season that i
picked up on the series and now i watch
it when it drops at 4am
every season in spite of whatever
nostalgia it may inspire before
reminding people that the 80s was her
thing
it's just an exceptionally well made
show on nearly every front but it wasn't
until i re-binged the series going into
season 4 that i really struggled to
figure out where to find the nostalgia
in the first chapter of this stephen
king esque kids on bikes supernatural
horror the show points out several
brands that don't exist anymore reminds
you of the role that modern brands had
in contributing to the cultural
atmosphere of the 1980s and the plot
takes you to places that have mostly
died off when you get down to it that's
really where the nostalgia is a
celebration of narrative tropes and
characters that were frequent in the
1980s specifically those commonly used
by stephen king the duffer brothers were
actually in discussion to spearhead
2017's remake of it but warner brothers
didn't want to hire people only known
for streaming shows
and now warner brothers is desperately
trying to get their streaming service
off the ground
however is a reprisal of narrative
tropes alone indicative of nostalgia i
would struggle to justify that even per
the dictionary definition especially as
far as these instances were meant to
reprise these tropes and find ways to
fit them into the larger context of
cultural awareness tropes themselves are
not limited to a particular point in
time and when it comes to the second
season
there really isn't that much more in the
way of the feel-good rose-tinted lens we
expect of media about the 80s
again the reverence here is a reverence
for tropes and narrative devices that
were popular in the day
if season 1 is a love letter to stephen
king and steven spielberg with the likes
of e.t
season two is a love letter to the
exorcist gremlins whether or not a piece
of historic media is out to
sentimentalize the past depends on what
it's trying to get you to remember and
what it's encouraging you to overlook
compare and contrast with ready player
one ready player one references the 80s
incessantly with allusions to video
games and cultural icons but does
absolutely nothing to depict the
cultural context from which it was
removed for instance ready player one
almost cluelessly makes the principal
villain an executive who is trying to
gain ownership of a public commodity
this element juxtaposed against the
positive depictions of scrappy kids
fighting the man and reverent treatment
of 1980s iconography establishes a
narrative language
things from the 1980s are good we want
these things to save the day and be
heroic but things shown to be from our
modern culture that being corporate
takeovers commodification financial
exploitation
these are bad things
and the implicit messaging is
things today are bad
so don't you miss the 1980s when things
were good but these are things that
started happening in the 1980s with
reagan's campaign of deregulation the
rose tinted goggles allowed the reader
viewer to pretend they didn't pop up
until recently through a viewer's
emotional investment in media a producer
can associate positive feelings with the
1980s you want what the characters you
identify with want you want eggos and
when a producer wants you to turn away
from something like
secret government laboratories
they can associate negative feelings
when your main characters interact with
government agencies that's called
subliminal messaging when nostalgia is
described as toxic it's referencing
media which seeks to use this subliminal
process to redevelop historic realities
in this instance forming positive
emotions around cultural landmarks of
the 1980s the more this process is
repeated the more the negative aspects
of 80s culture are diminished and there
was plenty about the 1980s that was
horrible and that became more true the
less white the less straight the less
male and the less rich you were the
thing is i can't really say that
stranger things does anything to really
engage with this kind of nostalgic
celebration season one spends most of
its episodes going out of its way to
remind people why stranger danger was
such a big deal stranger danger while
you may have heard the phrase used
comedically has an incredibly dark
history back in the 80s there was a
massive rash of child disappearances to
the point of nearly becoming endemic
stranger danger was a propaganda
campaign and in this context propaganda
is used positively to condition children
to be wary of strangers
even if and especially if they claim to
know your parents and tell you to get
into a car stranger things season one
revolves mostly around the disappearance
of will byers and hinges on his mother
joyce played by multiple oscar nominee
winona ryder who thanks to this series
is finally getting her career back after
shoplifting god it didn't take much back
in the day anyway winona carries the
first season as a mother experiencing an
emotional breakdown over the
disappearance of her child the first
season also dealt with severe bullying
to the point of knife violence double
standards regarding sexuality among boys
and girls extreme prevalence of casual
homophobia and a complete dismissal of
trauma from almost literally
everyone with stranger things one as an
exclusive reference in conjunction with
will buyer's hair the 1980s is not a
period of time i would ever want to live
in and given that the social climate of
the first season is focused entirely
around bullying slut-shaming and casual
homophobia i'm not sure what about
season one made so many people write it
off as mindless nostalgic drivel season
two seemed to have even less to say
about the 1980s specifically aside from
featuring a local arcade as a setting
for a handful of scenes and an
unmentioned albeit obvious racist
sentiment coming from a secondary
villain elements that can be considered
to be nostalgia based
i feel like in a lot of ways they're
just there to frame the characters as
being people who existed in the 1980s
the ghostbusters halloween costumes may
be a hollow reminder of the franchise's
origins but it's also not at all out of
the question that a group of four nerdy
friends would opt to make costumes out
of one of the most popular movies of the
year not that they need help to
establish these characters but it would
make less sense if they dressed up as
anything else for halloween if creators
go out of their way to avoid cultural
references in historic media there's a
point where it becomes more apparent
than if they just let their characters
exist in the time period where a
discussion about popular movies would
inevitably find its way into a
conversation season three stands out in
the series however whereas the prior two
seasons do very little to engage with
the celebration of the era season three
seems to want to dive right in without
any prior build up in the first two
seasons the key element of the third
season revolves around the nostalgia
of shopping malls
malls seem to hold a place of particular
prominence in 1980s media
my guess is that first of all there was
a glut of shopping malls constructed in
the 1980s secondly they became prevalent
as teenage safe hangout zones with only
cursory adult supervision capitalism
says
get em young so a lot of adults today
have collected a large number of teenage
memories that take place in shopping
malls as they grow up and become
creators and audiences like all
generations they favor media which
revisits their childhood whereas the
prior seasons were referencing a rash of
missing children that nobody likes to
talk about as well as a mysterious virus
beset on people who may or may not be
homosexual again that nobody really
likes to talk about season three
features a lot of hell yeah the mall
there are two overlapping shopping
montages a strong positive association
between teenage freedom of identity and
consumerism and a plethora of product
placement which feels more like a 30
rock joke wow this is diet snapple i
know it tastes like regular snapple
doesn't it but wanton references to
products aren't the only methods this
season has to evoke nostalgic feelings
all seasons stranger things feature a
number of 80 songs that have stood the
test of time with specific songs taking
the center stage as pivotal moments for
plot developments which in itself is not
altogether uncommon for other media
which focuses on the 1980s or any decade
for that matter and while prior seasons
of stranger things tried to latch onto
one or two songs season 3 kicks it up a
notch the show cuts from one song to the
next at a dizzying rate over the first
half it begins to feel like a jukebox
musical like i said season 3 stands out
in this regard and i have to wonder why
it's reported that eggo had a huge
business spike following season 1 so
you'd think that if there was going to
be a glut of product placement finding
its way into the show it would have been
in season two and there were a few more
brands openly depicted in that season
namely pringles and dr pepper steve
drives a bmw but it's really nothing
more than you'd expect from any other
television show and when a piece of
media establishes patterns which it then
begins to change we the audience are
implored to wonder why the easy answer
is that netflix knows that this show is
printing money
so they want to double down and sell ad
space in the show itself things like the
michael bay transformers movies are
infamous for doing this
do you like music
the pill
which is a cynical albeit all too common
occurrence but i'm not convinced the
stranger things sold out like that
because if that was the case it would
have kept it up with season four in
which it goes back to the normal amount
of brand references and even then these
references aren't always the shallow
holding the can at the right angle to
see the whole logo instances of brand
display that we're so used to that we
just ignore now using hey remember eggos
as an example they are significant to
the plot insofar as they're meaningful
to eleven whereas other characters
including other kids cie goes as
entirely unremarkable they are
remarkable to eleven because she has
never had food like this to this
remarkable young girl eggos are a symbol
of her freedom which if you feel like it
you can read into it as this very
nostalgic and downright patriotic
depiction of consumer products as
evident of american capitalist freedom
for which eleven's freedom to purchase
and consume her favorite brand of
waffles is at odds with the government
that wants to control her which in
itself is nostalgic for reagan-era
anti-government propaganda as per his
quote the
nine most terrifying words in the
english language are
i'm from the government and i'm here to
help this sentiment coming from the
executive branch no less established an
ideological battle between the american
government and american industry and if
we're presenting nostalgic tropes and
stranger things we must also be aware
that a massive component of american pop
culture from the decade conformed to
this ideological conflict touching on
ghostbusters again probably among the
principal pieces of 1980s corporate
media it was all about a group of
entrepreneurs providing a needed service
which the government was hell-bent on
shutting down due to ambiguous
government regulation this movie was not
at all the cause but symptomatic of a
successful propaganda campaign launched
by the reagan administration propaganda
with the intent to erode public trust
for the government in order to garnish
the public support needed to remove
regulations and safety checks placed
upon the economy that had existed since
the new deal regulations and safeties
which ensured that the great depression
would not happen again and that america
would have the ability to endure smaller
recessions without decimating the
economy but these regulations also cut
into profit and it's interesting that
season three the season that takes place
almost entirely in a mall is the only
season to engage in any kind of
political economic or ideological debate
about american culture within the
written text of the script so perhaps
what can be read as nostalgic longing is
actually a very specific point being
made about the kind of consumerism that
sprung up in the 1980s because for all
the freedom the mall affords the cast of
teenagers it's not a picnic for everyone
on a textual level small businesses
around hawkins are drying up this is a
brief part of the story that exists more
in establishing shots and it's dropped
early on but on a subtextual level look
at what's going on the shopping mall a
temple to american capitalism was funded
and constructed by a cell of soviet
agents to conceal a secret base deep
underground where they could open a
portal to hell with the intent of moving
an army onto american soil undetected
furthermore the final battle takes place
in the maul against a giant flesh
monster constructed out of the liquefied
remains of the members of the community
this could alternately be read as the
heroic defense of this quintessentially
american capitalistic space against
soviets and flesh monsters however
keep in mind that the season does go out
of its way to talk about political
ideology which means that the writers
want you to think about it not even in
the america good rush a bad kind of way
but actually diving into the mechanics
of these different economic systems you
know what i love most about this country
capitalism it means this is a free
market system which means people get
paid for their services depending on how
valuable their contributions are even
though erica is aware of the
institutional and ideological separation
between the political models there are
some bits of information that are being
omitted namely the reasoning for why
either system is greater than the other
if we are living in reagan's america we
have to realize that this was a period
of time when the economic philosophies
of iron rand if you could call them that
began to be applied on a federal level
rand left russia for the west where she
truly felt that capitalism was a
superior form of
culture her primary philosophical
contrast was that she felt that soviet
communism resulted in collectivism where
the population is conditioned to conform
into a singular ideology the people like
what the state says they like they eat
what the state says they act how the
state says the state commissions music
and film for the people to enjoy
individuality and expression is
repressed in order for each citizen to
behave and act in accordance with what
the state needs the state needs a farmer
you're a farmer granted in larger urban
areas like st petersburg and moscow
there was a bit more freedom in what
venues you had opened to you but because
the kremlin had to govern so much
territory if you were born to farmers in
rural latvia it did not matter how
talented a musician you could be the
state needs you to be a farmer in
contrast to collectivism rand lauded the
west for its promotion of individualism
in her perfect little world where
actions have no consequences and
ironically everyone behaves as she
expects them to capitalism affords the
opportunities for people with radical
ideas to rise up and belly flop under
the free market those ideas which people
want will thrive those which people do
not will fade away the primary selling
point of capitalism is meritocracy where
there is a system of capital which
rewards diligence or innovation and this
process rand argues is the crux of the
individual's ability to express their
individual personhood
shopping malls slightly off topic but
not really i'm not entirely convinced
that rand wasn't a soviet sleeper agent
sent to america to speed up the downfall
of decadent capitalism with her own even
more toxic version of capitalism now her
thought process is flawed for a number
of reasons chiefly the naive insanity of
assuming that those who refuse to
innovate will simply bow their heads and
gracefully fade away from the market to
make way for the new innovators and that
corporations and individuals with
sufficient wealth will not flex their
wealth to shut down competition and for
all rand blamed the government for
restricting glorious freedom
the corporatocratic oligarchy of america
influences the government to protect
their interests these interests include
the hidden copyright vault in general
electric nokia and big pharma in general
which each house the technology to throw
us into a utopic age because their
largest yearly expense is buying a
patented technology developed at
universities to make sure they never see
the light of day in order to foster the
consumer public's dependency on their
existing profit-driven products and
because this always comes back to disney
this also includes their influence over
american lawmaking to chronically extend
the date of intellectual property
ownership expiry suddenly capitalism
isn't a meritocracy anymore it rewards
people of wealth with more wealth and
everyone else
do they get to be individuals there is a
possible reading of season three that
discusses this examine hawkins almost
everybody who isn't in the main cast
each season depicts a clear through line
of groupthink you are to like what
society expects you to like you are to
eat what you are expected to eat you are
within an established expectation of
behavior you are expected to listen to a
certain kind of music and you face
public ridicule if you do not conform as
closely as possible the government
doesn't
it was how to convince a population to
enjoy something they may not otherwise
enjoy tip if you present your product as
if everyone already likes it people will
decide that they want to like it because
they want to like what everybody else
likes and suddenly popularity and being
liked by others boils down to a matter
of who can exemplify the most archetypal
version of american that a given
population has decided upon thanks
mccarthyism and this has social feedback
as well skip ahead to season four where
hawkins goes on a vigilante spree
against a dungeons and dragons group
you're not supposed to like nerd things
you're supposed to like basketball
so if you like dungeons and dragons
there must be something wrong with you
something delinquent
and if there's one delinquent thing
about you then it's not a stretch to say
that you are a ritualistic demon
worshiper funny thing is this actually
happened there really was a widespread
component of the satanic panic which
zeroed in on dungeons and dragons but
also bled over into the 1990s with
things like magic the gathering and
maybe not specifically tied to d and d
but there were public vigilante mobs
that targeted people who were accused of
living outside christian normativity
just look at the story of the san
antonio iv but back to season three you
have a giant flesh monster made up of
good capitalist toms and jains attacking
our heroic group of weirdos a capitalist
collective trying to murder a bunch of
social outcasts the statement here is
that this american freedom brought about
by capitalism doesn't really exist
all consumers are just part of the same
flesh monster at the end of the day
where they continue to consume but now
they consume you but the problem with
season three is that while this
discourse is going on we get sucked into
situations where the plot is stopped to
remember something from the 1980s
and it's also worth mentioning that the
day was saved in part due to dangerously
unregulated fireworks crafted into
improvised explosives there's a reason
this warning label says 18 or older this
sucker is filled with 150 grains of
black powder aka gunpowder
play this you ugly piece of [ __ ]
which establishes two conflicting
languages one which subverts nostalgia
and one which promotes it so i question
whether the subversion was the intended
reading or just an incidental inclusion
as a result of half the season needing
to take place in a shopping mall
confusing and inconsistent literary
language makes for messy analysis and i
feel like because season three contains
so much nostalgic content leaning in one
direction or the other could
definitively answer whether the series
as a whole is using nostalgia as a
selling point or whether it's subverting
it but once again we're at a troubled
spot a definition or description of the
uses of nostalgia is not very helpful
for telling us how to identify it
the tricky thing about nostalgia
is that sometimes media just takes place
in a bygone era historic fiction another
thing is that younger generations who
never lived in the 1980s say can be
found reminiscing about the decade for
the sake of aesthetics community values
and longing to be part of a specific
social movement that lived and died
before the clinton administration the
latter case is problematic because
people in these instances often overlook
the unflattering components of the past
cue a bunch of gay people my age and
younger who wish they'd been born in new
york or san francisco a few decades ago
so that they could have been a part of
proper gay society without acknowledging
the terror the queer people lived under
every day and the reason this culture
was so vibrant was because we
desperately needed counter programming
to the gloom
of everyday existence and so it's not
always the 80s for some it's the 70s
with disco and experimental rock for
others it's the 60s with soul and
woodstock my question being how can
nostalgia be used to describe these
feelings of people my age if a
definition of nostalgia requires
memories or lived experiences another
question is
when
is nostalgia intended for take a book
like the great gatsby by f scott
fitzgerald these days it's held up as a
token of literary canon and taught in
many high schools to frame a discourse
around the 1920s and modernism in prose
literature at the time it was considered
to be a failure next to fitzgerald's
other successful novels and was largely
ignored however it was rediscovered
after the second world war and held up
as a relic that described the cultural
mindset of the roaring 20s at its peak
even though it was intendedly written
for a 1920s audience could we say that
this is nostalgic media
because it offered a sense of nostalgia
to an audience in the 1950s it's
difficult to find media that's
celebratory of the day and age that it's
made in creators as per their nature are
often critical of social conventions and
use fiction as a way to highlight these
frustrations can we say then that
nostalgia as creators may use it to
depict the past is used to contextualize
criticisms they have about contemporary
society but again is there a clear line
between nostalgia and historical fiction
can you have one without the other
you could even say that something like
the medieval fantasy or even dungeons
and dragons itself is nostalgic because
the dungeon master doesn't make a point
of killing off half of the sidecast from
dysentery which honestly is probably why
things like game of thrones typically
focus around the wealthier classes who
had the privilege to afford things like
medicine and basic hygiene but it does
contribute to a concept of nostalgia in
which the inconvenient embarrassing or
harmful elements of the past are
forgotten in exchange for the ability to
frame a particular story in an aesthetic
setting the end result of nostalgic
fiction seems to be the argument wasn't
this time in history kind of great
wouldn't you want to be alive then for
me personally not a day before
penicillin and air conditioning but
where is the line drawn in general and
how do we identify this kind of
nostalgia well
it's probably best to go over some
examples we've already touched on ready
player one and the consequences of the
framing devices it uses to moralize
contemporary culture versus those of the
past
but it's far from being the only one of
its kind
[Music]
downton abbey is one of the most
successful english shows of all time
appealing to audiences of all stripes by
using the centuries-old upstairs
downstairs dynamic of telling stories of
the rich and the poor's who support them
again with the emotional support boards
you can watch the show in french german
korean russian persian and it had an
estimated global audience of 160 million
viewers at its peak in 2014 yet downton
abbey is just the newest in a long line
of conservative propaganda that gets
lapped up by audiences yearning for the
good old days of yore from merchant
ivory films to notting hill much of
england's media exports have been
reinforcing old world class stereotypes
that we modern people seem to love for
some reason doubting is a world where
rules matter how you dress for a meal
which spoon you use the right time to
visit a new neighbor
the life of downton's characters
is a choreographed dance punctuated by
seasonal celebrations daily and weekly
rituals and celebrating a lifestyle that
has been regulated by the same chain of
tradition rules and expectations
for centuries the sanctity of the
country house as ordered harmonious and
class bound was never really challenged
and the audience cheered when the
various selfish and evil characters
usually amongst the poors were sent on
their way by nice loyal poor's who knew
their place whilst the series did toy
with things like irish politics the
suffragette movement homosexuality and
middle class identity it shied away from
any real critique of english society at
the time heritage television like this
is regularly criticized for engendering
nostalgia about an idealized past in a
classic critique the film scholar andrew
higson suggested that such work serve to
present a conservative englishness that
never really existed it is inarguable
that downton abbey presents a kind of
lovingly rendered unquestioned version
of the past in the first down movie lady
mary crowley a key member of the family
was wondering whether the time had come
to sell the grand british estate home to
a handful of aristocrats in their army
of servants maybe the family should move
to a more reasonably sized large manner
and turn downton into something useful
like a school but her maid
begged her to keep downton in the family
forever a symbol of glory and honor for
the staff and surrounding town don't you
see
all the poor people ever really wanted
was more aristocracy the show and the
movies that have followed have always
taken a romantic view of the old
economic hierarchy we're supposed to be
moving past yes this is a period piece
written by julian fellowes the most
periody of british period writers he's
also a conservative member of the house
of lords and yet so much of actual 1920s
history goes unseen at the time the
british labor movement was gaining
traction while british newspapers were
breathlessly covering the social lives
of the aristocracy some people were
pushing for the abolition of hereditary
titles and demanding that noble's land
be taxed in 1928 working-class women
would get the right to vote within 20
years the entire system would fall apart
and domestic service would go from being
one of britain's largest sectors of
employment for women
to being virtually non-existent few
working-class tears were shed for the
end of that era but if you've done
little research into this history and
only know it the way julian fellowes
wants you to know it
you wouldn't know that in fact you'd
think it was damn near the downfall of
england as a whole and that even the
poorest of the poor were heartbroken to
see the ultra rich losing some of their
titles and land so why do so many of us
watch this show with a romantic feeling
in our hearts the servants have been
stuck downstairs long enough yeah
it's time we go upstairs
wait what do you mean i'm talking about
a revolt i'm talking about a worker
uprising
others among us myself included layer
aspiration with resentment
on fictional shows like hbo's succession
about a family that owns a global media
empire luxury porn goes down with a
chaser of self-satisfaction those grand
summer homes and helicopter rides are
symbols of moral decay in real life we
lap up the college admissions scandal
and the nouveau riche ostentatiousness
of real housewives taking satisfaction
when the rich people's self-serving
tackiness catches up with them and we
know that the wait staff is watching
with clear eyes and the power to topple
the system from within like the
bartender whose secret 47 video helped
to doom mitt romney's 2012 run for
president in downton abbey there's no
threats like that the worst case
scenario is a valet spill some soup and
there's a stability in that kind of
thing that makes us nostalgic for a time
when one small mistake one missed
payment one forgotten appointment
wouldn't lead to you being homeless or
without a doctor but the nostalgia
portrayed in downton is a fantasy
there's this portrayal of a kinder set
of relationships between people of
different economic classes the servant
characters in downton like the dressing
lady mary feel a bond to their masters
that isn't just economic but emotional
and the aristocrats feel an obligation
to their servant's welfare and
appreciation for even the dressing and
polishing skills that they bring to the
table priya sasha a stanford university
history professor said of this we're
wise enough to know that this is a
romantic very idealized depiction of
servant and master relations but we just
find it so attractive
if we're going to have inequality can it
at least be nice
can the dignity of every kind of work be
acknowledged this is it's true the
difference between downton style
inequality and the transactional
relationships of today's economy gone
are the days of benevolent corporate
paternalism a social compact that ranged
from pension funds to full-on company
towns now pensions are outsourced to
401ks healthcare costs are passed on to
the employees and within the confines of
the gig economy employer-employee
relationships don't exist at all so
nostalgia for those good old days can
creep into our mind while watching the
show even though those good old days
never really existed
the poor is lucky enough to land jobs
with the riches who didn't treat them
like crap were almost always white
christian straight cisgender and spoke
english as a first language everyone
else could die in a hole and often did
and for those who did have work there
wasn't a whole lot of camaraderie and
love for the upper classes
it was a business arrangement where both
parties resented the other for their
existence there's a reason the servants
were in the basement or in another house
altogether and no amount of bbc programs
where the rich and poor celebrated
christmas together will ever change that
yes
it was likely true that some of the
staff would become attached to their
patrons usually those who worked closer
to the patrons and whose
responsibilities weren't so
degrading
also the ones who would be paid
considerably more i can also see it
being a trend among rich people the ones
educated enough to write logs to be kept
for historic record
for them to imagine having been much
kinder to their servants than the
servants may have felt laughing at your
boss's bad jokes is a great way to get a
raise or promotion after all i've seen
modern media where rich ladies will
start to see their hispanic housekeeper
as their real friends
and i've seen people on twitter report
how bonkers weird it is to be on the
receiving end of those affections the
servants in downton abbey were employees
not family
the poor's survival depended on them
being able to navigate the nuances of
that relationship
the more they started to think of them
like family the more cutthroat things
would get in the kitchens and it's very
telling i think
that the story of downton abbey at least
as of now ends in 1928.
the year before the lords and
capitalists of the day destroyed the
global economy but no one really has
nostalgic yearnings for the great
depression so i doubt we'll be seeing
lord julian fellowes
tackling that anytime soon
greece is a 1978 film adaptation of the
1971 musical of the same name taking
place in the autumn semester of high
school in 1958 this film itself is
indicative of a nostalgic longing for
that decade which would define the
cultural sensibilities of the 1950s
greece features an archetypal plotline
of a girl and a boy in high school the
boy is afraid to be sensitive with the
girl because he faces social ridicule
for being a boy with feelings and the
girl struggles to find a way to
convince him to open up to her the
resolution of this boy and girl
heterosexual dilemma is that the girl
decides she's going to completely shift
her aesthetic to be a living pinup
poster
and while she rocks the look it's a
terrible message to send to girls
wondering why boys are jerks no dangling
cleavage on a string like a carrot from
a fishing pole in front of a horse will
not get him to shape up greece's main
appeal is the entire environment of
presenting the 1950s having spoken to
older people about this movie they claim
it is very accurate to capturing the
social environment of the day and age
rumor mills drive-ins milkshake diners
boys with their cars and broken hearts
at high school dances and outside of
redeeming girls who are unashamed of not
being like the other girls in school
like rizzo there isn't really that much
in greece that offers a social
commentary greece kind of functions like
this museum exhibit a recreation of a
dilapidated temple of eisenhower era
america and as this is eisenhower's
america a discussion about the
desegregation of schools is never
mentioned there are no black or asian
characters of note there is nerium
mention of homophobia severe bullying
nor any other kind of social problems
which plagued the 1950s as per the
depiction in greece the 50s seemed like
an absolute bestest ever time to be
alive the positive elements of the
decade are removed entirely from the
cultural reality of the era and what we
have is this dreamlike 50s fantasy where
everyone is having a great time 16 year
olds can have amazing cars smoking
doesn't cause cancer and pregnancy was
the worst possible outcome from sex and
you may say but james can't you just let
people like happy things to which i say
i really like greece i performed songs
from greece at talent shows for three
years straight in elementary school
nearly every song is an absolute banger
and even the side characters have stuff
to do namely the girls but i digress the
problem with media like this is when i
ask
what's a piece of media about the 50s
you think of greece or other media like
greece whereas media set in the 50s that
points out how it wasn't a party for
everybody often gets pushed to the
wayside i don't have a problem with fun
whimsical media about the past
especially if like greece the framing
devices of the film highlight that this
is a very dreamlike and fantastical
depiction of the subject matter the
problem becomes when a given public
actively ignores and forgets media which
depicts a given time period a little
more earnestly and that's not to say
that you can't have a dreamlike
whimsical musical media that doesn't
incorporate systemic social issues john
waters hair spray is a gay old time
dripping in nostalgic love for the 1960s
and yet it also contains woven into the
plot itself reminders of the systemic
social issues that were still prevalent
in the 60s and today which to the
advantage of the musical film genre you
can trick people into absorbing social
commentary a whole lot easier if the
songs are catchy
most people never knew that the sound of
music one of the most famous and
well-regarded musicals of all time
is actually about resisting nazis but
that's because they didn't know the
movie kept going after maria gets
married to georg von trapp and how it's
exclusively about the family fighting
nazis with music and passive resistance
because it was released on two vhs's and
we pretend take two didn't exist fun
fact if you are a commanding officer in
a military where you are being
encouraged to commit war crimes you can
actually leave your country that's an
option and it is ethical there really
isn't a just following order's argument
that turns out well for the person using
it the sound of music follows the
musical journey of maria a young woman
studying to be a nun unfortunately she's
got her head in the clouds and not in
the kind of way the catholics appreciate
with the intent of giving her something
productive to do the convent sends her
to the von trapp estate to be the
governess of a retired naval officer's
seven children the children reeling from
the house being run like a navy vessel
since the death of their mother struggle
to open up to maria but through the
sound of music
she wins them over and eventually their
father keep in mind this is actually a
true story however as georg von trapp is
a renowned austrian officer and a baron
the rising nazi party desperate for
military legitimacy commands him to
return to his post
georg does not at all like the idea of
the nazi party and loads how the
austrian government handed itself over
to hitler he and maria agreed to flee
the country by traversing the alps and
relocate to america where they have more
children and become a sensationally
famous family choir now when it comes to
the musical a lot of the nazi stuff is
kept on the periphery it's really only
brought up early on through the eldest
daughter louisa and her teenage love
interest rolf because of course they
named the pretty boy nazirolf i was born
in dusseldorf and that is why they call
me rolf so with the nazi stuff in the
background a lot of the sound of music
is about a callback to when life was
good and simple living in an era like
the weimar republic the natural historic
beauty of an austrian city that had not
been decimated by the first world war
and when family values fought against
rigid conformity and if you stop
watching the sound of music at the
wedding
this is the nostalgia you get it's not
until george gets back from his
honeymoon and rips down the swastika
that's hanging over his manor that you
start to clue in oh [ __ ] and they really
filmed a portion of this movie in the
square where nazis held book burnings in
salzburg but as were the chronology of
the film maria would have no idea that
these things would take place while
she's singing about the confidence she
needs to muster which is considered to
be one of the better songs in the movie
but was not actually in the original
stage version some gay theater trivia
for you the fact that so many people
report that as soon as the von trapp
wedding happened their parents hit the
pause button on the vcr and quickly
ushered their kids to bed is a perfect
example of how various media frames
nostalgia the abridged sound of music
tells the story of freedom and love
overcoming rigid social expectations
it's about the power of song and
expression having the ability to erode
and overcome grief sorry
tearing up a little at that and that
alone is a very positive glowing
depiction of social values as they
existed moving out of the classical
values of europe from the 1800s
embracing a more liberated social
climate that can be found in the turn of
the century and especially into the
1920s and without the social framing of
hey the nazis are coming we don't really
realize that this cultural mindset was
juxtaposed against a very different
social climate that existed in europe at
this very same time which is an
important part about nostalgia and media
oftentimes it removes cultural reality
in lieu of feel-good fantasies playing
off of memories of the good old days we
take negativity for granted and as we
get older and bitter we see negativity
mounting
pessimism is present but if we hate
where we are today we tend to look back
for a frame of reference for when times
were better and if we cannot find one
we will usually reinvent our past to
become the utopia we want
and so we look on the good times we had
learning how to sing and play guitar
from our nanny and we reject the
memories of fleeing from the hugo boss
germans with guns which i would like to
point out how difficult it would be to
make the sound of music today and how
people would be asking
why are musicals all of a sudden so
political when resisting nazis was never
really considered political beyond being
a for granted civic duty until recently
remember when republicans flocked to
glenn beck because he accused every
democrat of being hitler and given
studio's reluctance to really lean
politically in any direction including a
direction that involves telling kids
it's okay to punch nazis if sound of
music was being made today it would
likely entirely omit the nazis
altogether and instead feature the von
trapp family traveling to america to
pursue fame and fortune like abba or
something and be no more than two hours
long which is another problem with
nostalgia it seeks to remove the
political reality from a cultural
climate and this is the problem with
people complaining about star wars or
ghostbusters or whatever as suddenly
being political where it wasn't before
telling yourself that certain media is
suddenly political
when it was not is
yep
an element of nostalgia
upon examination there comes a time in
every 30-year cycle where the
intellectuals of a generation begin to
critically think about the droves of
feel-good reprisals they who were also
alive in these nostalgic times are
willing to recall things with a bit more
honesty and yes that may mean the film
is a bit off-putting to right-wingers
but for this group of creators what they
have to say is more important than
saying anything for a buck
i know what you're thinking what's this
doing here damn it there's gonna be a
whole generation of you who have never
even heard of this movie okay so austin
powers was a comedic movie that was a
spoof of james bond the 90s and 2000s
were popular for this kind of comedy
taking an existing plot format the spy
thriller and making a farce out of it in
this case focusing on the suave sexy
super spy austin powers is cryogenically
frozen so that he can be youthful and at
the top of his game pending the return
of his rival dr evil a large section of
the comedy in this movie is derived from
the very large gap in sex appeal as it
existed in the 1960s and sex appeal as
it existed in the 1990s and though he
was at the peak of sexuality in the 60s
austin does not adapt to fit 90
sensibilities very well this movie
itself is a commentary on the 30 year
cycle that hit the 90s with a wave of
groovy psychedelic 60s nostalgia however
everything that is pulled from the 1960s
feels out of place and uncomfortable and
at odds with 90s cultural sensibilities
and for all the culture of the 1990s
nostalgized the 60s the film highlighted
many elements where certain parts of the
60s were left behind namely social
liberties i could make a case for
arguing that perhaps the movie is
mocking the 90s for wanting that 60s
aesthetic while holding on to that
post-reagan social and fiscal
conservatism the 60s after all existed
in a pre-aids world of what we describe
as free love as in
you give your love
freely she's the village bicycle
everyone's had a ride
coinciding with the sexual revolution
that would continue ramping up through
the 70s and
would come to a halt when aids began to
spread through a population that had
abandoned condoms for birth control
medication austin powers the movie is
also not shy to be critical of people of
the 60s either for establishing these
practices without foresight enough to
anticipate a
venereal fallout but as long as people
are still having promiscuous sex with
many anonymous partners without
protection well at the same time
experimenting with mind-expanding drugs
in a consequence-free environment i'll
be sound as it found of course true to
those 1960 sensibilities this is a
comedy movie designed for audiences who
take to herbal inebriation so as much as
i feel these readings are there i think
the primary objective here is simply to
present highly structured absurdity that
said the movie does take the time to
point out that a fixation on a decade 30
years prior is a little absurd in itself
there is a certain selective memory when
it comes to even venerating a single
subculture of a given decade for
everyone building their identity around
a watered-down 1960s aesthetic mike
myers says hold my mint julep and shows
up with frills square glasses and a bowl
cut suffice to say given the success of
this movie and the sequel there's a
strong case to say that subverting
nostalgic sentiments of the day and age
is also part of the cultural mindset
granted austin powers too premiered in
1999 and by the time the franchise got a
third installment they had to bump it up
to the 1970s presumably because the 60s
got stale and
beyonce perhaps by this time a nostalgic
subversion of the 60s had worn out and
you couldn't really make a mockery of it
more than had already been done which
suggests to me that the point at which
nostalgic tropes become a mockery is an
indication that we are as a culture
coming to terms with the problems of the
era we had spent the prior 10 years
longing for
hi georgie the 2017 adaptation of
stephen king's it captures what so many
modern 80s set or 80s influenced horror
films rarely achieve it doesn't just
attempt to recreate the 80s through
clever pop culture references instead it
brings back the genuine wonder that our
grasping nostalgic quests often seek
while at the same time reminding us that
horror is more than recognizable
aesthetics it's facing the temporary
nature of time and innocence like a
balloon these moments are fleeting
destined to lose air or as pennywise
would say
it was a success because the film takes
place in the 1980s instead of its
original novel timeline in which the
kids section takes place in the 1950s it
was successful because it takes place in
the 80s where kids recognize that the
worst horrors of the world aren't
mummies werewolves or clowns but a world
where adults have left them their own
worst failings as an inheritance it taps
into one of modern society's greatest
fears
the endangerment of children but unlike
most nostalgic stories that look back at
bygone eras and gloss over the negatives
of the time especially for children it
focuses on them the real horrors of
childhood like fear of the unknown
violent bullying abusive parents and for
many of us feeling like a complete
outcast it doesn't use a metaphor to
show us the horrors of growing up
instead shows us the true horrors
plainly alongside the demonic pennywise
there's a nostalgia within the film that
is rarely used the nostalgia of being
afraid this idea traces all the way back
to some of the earliest stories told to
children fairy tales and nursery rhymes
witches in the woods waiting to devour
lost children predatory wolves
pretending to be someone you can trust
in order to take you away forever
something terribly prescient in 1980s
america when stranger danger was such a
prevalent fear georgie
meet pennywise
now we aren't strangers the 80 saw a
rash of child disappearances across the
country which the 2017 version of it
plays into unlike the book in which
unsolved murders are taking place the
film roots us firmly in the real world
by making the threat into children
vanishing without a trace and then
reinforces the stranger danger by making
every adult in the little town of derry
maine come across as a toxic force
terrifying in their own right they're
not monsters or pennywise in disguise
they're just grown-ups but little was
more terrifying than a non-parental
grown-up in the time of stranger danger
this time period during which stephen
king originally wrote the doorstop size
novel was rife with nostalgia for the
1950s a movement spearheaded by ronald
reagan who won both his presidential
terms on the promise of restoring
america to the glory it had displayed
during those post-war years but as the
character of mike hanlon says in the
book we lie best when we lie to
ourselves
and lying to ourselves is what we do
when we engage in nostalgia not only
does it devote ample narrative to
illustrating how the past is not as
perfect as many choose to believe but
forgetting and sugarcoating the past is
what allows most of the bad things in
this story to happen if nostalgia is our
tendency to remember and long for a past
that never quite existed the nostalgia
could be said to protect it in it
children see things for what they really
are but when they get older when they
find power and privilege they forget
what life was like and do not see as
clearly as they used to the tendency of
those with power to forget or refuse to
believe is what allows natural and
supernatural horrors to occur it is
relevant that much of the horror in it
is perpetuated by human beings rather
than the titular interdimensional
monster it is a story full of bullying
domestic violence and hate crimes
against minorities while king is telling
a story about a monster that is
protected by people's desire to
misremember the past he is also telling
a parallel story about history and the
conditions that allow the more terrible
moments in human history to repeat
themselves through its cycles of feeding
and dormancy king almost anticipates
this nostalgic view of history as a
cycle itself and it makes the message
relevant all over again as yet another
u.s president donald trump won favor
through selling a false version of the
country's history and formed a tribe out
of believers in that false past it is
about a supernatural horror but also
about the human habits that allow
natural horrors to happen
it also suggests the remedy
looking at the past with clarity
becoming aware of how privilege and
power alter perceptions of the past it
lends itself to examination through the
lens of nostalgia because it is a novel
literally about returning home though
not the safe and better home visited
through memories but instead a
terrifying and dangerous home the losers
club's lives depend on seeing what the
town at large prefers to forget one
could argue that pennywise itself
is nostalgia every 27 years it returns
it comes back into our world with a
great act of violence and then leaves a
little while later with more blood
spilled only to sleep for 27 years and
then repeat the process mirroring the
30-year cycle of nostalgia it reflects a
societal habit of going through these
cycles and of forgetting the horrors
when they're not happening even though
the threat persists in the real world
but just as stan refused to be charmed
by the pleasant sounds and smells of the
circus it serves as a warning that we
allow privilege to distort our
perception of the past at our own peril
we let the horrors repeat
because we'd prefer to forget they ever
happened in the first place
i'm gonna do something a little
different and talk about a book so
excuse the lack of b-roll my best
friend's exorcism was written by grady
hendricks in 2016 and is actually set
for a film adaptation from amazon prime
it follows the story of abby in her
sophomore year as her best friend
gretchen goes missing briefly and when
she is found
she isn't quite the same abby lives a
relatively normal life until then at
least as far as she describes it holding
down a number of friends but gretchen is
the only truly close friend she has and
it may even read a little sapphic the
story is a retrospective look at the
culture of the late 1980s for all that
high school students would actively
engage in pop culture there are abundant
references to the go-gos to madonna to
80s heartthrobs and all those other warm
fuzzy things that are worth remembering
however hendricks uses this to lull the
reader into a rosy acceptance of 1980s
culture you know me i love a good
demonic possession a close friend or
relative wreaking havoc upon a community
but
my best friend's exorcism does it a
little differently yes there are
supernatural elements that clearly
facilitate that gretchen is in fact
possessed by the demon andross one of
the demons listed in the goaesha a grand
marquis of hell demonologist colin de
plancia writes of him he appears to have
the body of an angel and the head of a
wood owl and to be riding a black wolf
and carrying in his hand a pointed saber
he teaches those whom he favors to kill
their enemies
masters and servants he stirs up trouble
and dissension
he commands 30 legions
while in possession of gretchen andros
does stir up trouble but none of the
poltergeisty kind of floating furniture
stuff andros uses relatively mundane
practices to destroy lives one of abby's
friends he tricks into drinking a weight
loss shake which turns out to have
tapeworm eggs and this friend nearly
dies because she did not realize that
she was loading her body up with
parasites tapeworms have been used as a
weight loss fad since the victorian era
but have a number of very serious health
consequences and yes it was very
available in the 1980s another friend is
catfished by gretchen into believing a
teacher was madly in love with her and
driven kind of crazy by it whereas the
tapeworm girl was body conscious this
girl is romance deprived andras preyed
on the natural insecurities that teenage
girls have and then used readily
available tools in fact while abby is
relatively upbeat and likes to engage in
the frivolous elements of 80s culture
andros a proxy of gretchen is a grim
reminder of the things that we choose to
not remember about the 80s weird racist
rituals that were left in the past
emotional abuse from parents zealotus
christian values imparted on homes that
kept you from engaging in culture an
entire community's refusal to even talk
about sexual abuse none of these things
are caused by the demon but he uses all
of these things to manipulate the world
into being
quite worse for everyone involved
in the end the evangelical exorcist they
recruit fails and flees the sight of the
exorcism the demon torments abby until
she conducts an exorcism of her own
casting the demon out in the name of the
gogos madonna and all the things that
she and gretchen love which is a very
charming way to subvert the exorcism
horror genre and all in all
this is a very balanced depiction of the
80s and when i hope that more nostalgic
media will engage in because
for all we may have fond memories of the
past or fondness for the past
we can't lose sight of how these things
fit
into the whole culture of the day and
it's important to have media like this
which explicitly reminds us that things
weren't always so great in the past
because even outside of media there are
forces in the world who want to try to
convince us that things were always
better back in the day
this is funny because while i've
mentioned that nostalgia in media often
involves a process of removing political
realities it turns out that the
political reality of today is heavily
rooted in nostalgia even the biden
campaign in both the primary and general
elections was marred in messaging that
urged america to go back
which is even more hilarious because
history indicates that the most
successful democratic winds are earned
off of iconography and slogans that
encourage americans to look forward to
tomorrow in most cases where nostalgia
in politics is to be found it's used in
conservatism conservatism itself is
focused on conserving a particular
national identity so it makes sense that
this is a frequent tactic from these
politicians the ideological objective of
right-wing politics is indeed focused on
presenting a mythology that a culture
has lost something good and that in
order to become a great nation they must
rebuild the nazi party for instance
loathed the social climate of berlin in
the weimar republic and urged germans to
believe that it would be possible to
rebuild
the holy roman empire however the holy
roman empire itself was not cohesive
with the political structures that the
nazi leaders wanted to maintain before
its collapse it was a complicated
network of nobility of varying titles
controlling vastly disparate swaths of
europe yes there was an emperor to whom
these nobles swore fealty
but it couldn't have been easy appeasing
all of these rivals the nazis wanted
more consolidation of power so even
there the promise of reconstructing the
empire was misleading these promises
were an idea that presented feelings of
greatness but were divorced from the
historic context similarly how american
conservatives and republicans
chronically pine over the 1950s as
presenting this kind of white dominant
simple living gender conformist
aesthetic you'd get from norman rockwell
paintings while dancing around the fact
that the highest tax bracket at the time
was set at 90 and someone working retail
could buy a house for a single income
family again when it comes to nostalgia
enforcing selective ignorance is part of
the game because you want people to
remember the good times as a frame of
reference for what you a politician can
bring to the table
but when you offer change there is the
question of into what will we change
change in progress is an easy pick for
people who live under the boot
if you want things to get better the
only way for that to happen is change
but for people who believe that they're
doing fine change is scary even though
when we talk about taxing the rich we're
not talking about you and your 200 000 a
year salary in your mcmansion and this
is especially true for a group of people
who can be convinced that they were once
doing fine but have fallen upon hard
times thanks to whatever scapegoat is
hot in media discussion hey you were all
doing great and america was doing great
but then all those
gender identities showed up and now
america sucks yes an expanded
understanding of gender and gender
identity coincides with the
recent collapse of the american economy
that's called a coincidence unbeknownst
to most people conservatism is a tool to
consolidate power conservatism is not to
conserve the good things in life because
when it comes to the use of conservative
politics the last thing they want is to
return to a wealth distribution as it
existed under the tenants of the new
deal they need their voting base to
remain angry and disgruntled enough to
believe that the root of all evil is
immigrants or queer people or feminism
so that their votes will ignore the ways
that their politicians will hurt them
oftentimes this politically nostalgic
process is much more subtle though
reagan's famous morning in america
campaign ad never explicitly talks about
going back it presents the notion that
america is doing great and that they
need to preserve this though with the
likes of trump this messaging is
far more overt specifically his infamous
slogan make america great again
not make america the best it can be
today or tomorrow instead make america
reprise a kind of greatness that is said
to have existed in the past
and unlike other political campaigns
trump brilliantly though absolutely
unintentionally does not evoke any kind
of imagery of what prior greatness we
are calling back to instead of picking a
specific era he leaves it up to each of
his supporters in their own particular
idea of american greatness this
culminates in a vague cloud of gender
archetypes and cultural sensibilities
which are all too indiscernible to
really be aware of and this process of
groupthink develops a vision of america
by a committee of voters an america that
only was ever meant to exist in the
imagination
but hey it worked
and it will keep working in fact this
sentiment was so successful that it has
even managed to skew perceptions of
progressivism people who occupy a
moderate or centrist political space are
becoming increasingly irritated by just
how many rights they have to fight for
they see a life-or-death struggle of
certain people and decry it as a
distraction from what the real issues
are when an interviewer asks hillary
clinton democrats seem to be going out
of their way to lose elections by
elevating activist causes notably the
transgender debate which are relevant
only to a small minority what sense does
it make to depict j.k rowling as a
fascist which
first of all is a loaded question just
write a [ __ ] think piece instead of
using a clinton interview to prop
yourself up on a soapbox however
hillary clinton responded we are
standing on the precipice of losing our
democracy and everything that everybody
else cares about then goes out the
window
look the most important thing is to win
the next election the alternative is so
frightening that whatever does not help
you win should not be a priority okay so
if the whole of the left needs to make
their sole purpose winning so the bad
guys don't make it worse
then what's the point of getting elected
in the first place
what are we going to bring to the table
aside from keeping republicans away from
it never mind that the only democrats
losing are centrists who campaign on
moderation and mediocrity progressive
democrats when they get past the
democratic party roadblocks tend to win
their elections we were told growing up
that democrats are the party you vote
for if you want to protect vulnerable
people that's what they pushed and now
apparently there is this sentiment among
the democrats that even that's passe
that the republicans are just too strong
or that the establishment democrats are
too spineless to fight for the people
we've been siphoning votes out of for
decades and that the best they can do is
just
stop it from getting worse
making it worse how could it be worse
rampant police violence ongoing use of
the trans-panic defense regressive book
banning laws targeting people of color
and queer creators and the loss of
federal protections for abortion
services including forcing women to
carry stillborn children before term and
all of this is happening while the
democrats control three out of the three
branches of the federal government what
needs to happen for democrats to even be
competent at stopping the other guys
from winning and yes
things can always get worse
but who's going to be left to vote blue
as the party platform procedurally
forgets its voter base
and what's going to be left
on the democratic platform
after that tax breaks but not quite as
much as the republicans
deregulation but not
quite as much as the republicans
hearkening back to clinton's sentiments
the objective of the democrats being
stop things from getting worse itself is
conservatism
we need to conserve what is good and
stop what's bad we don't need progress
we need to make sure things revert back
to a comfortable time
nostalgia
but not quite as radical as the
republicans and in the illusion that
political choices boil down to picking
one of two candidates
american society polarizes not on how to
move forward
but what version of the past
to which we must regress
and so because political leaders are
clamoring for regression many people who
want to fight for progress are seen as a
distraction persecuted group a gets mad
because group b is taking the discussion
away from them people from group c are
most at risk but sub group b2 claim that
their needs aren't as important because
they're a small demographic and people
who want to fight all these things at
the same time are decried as traitors by
all parties people left of center long
for the good old days of the 90s or
2000s before the blm stuff and this
gender woke stuff hearkening to an
imaginary period of clinton or obama
presidencies where everyone just got
along there are people who are so gaslit
from this that they just reject
nostalgia wherever it may appear either
in media or political discourse there's
this knee-jerk reaction to anything that
may even slightly indicate that the past
must be revisited because even when it
comes to frivolous depictions of
nostalgia that statement alone carries a
great deal of baggage among people for
whom their memories of the 90s are not
focused around ace of base but surely
we're not at the point in society where
every piece of media whether it's
fiction or not needs to be developed for
the sole purpose of raising the alarm to
the regressive tides sweeping across the
world spelling disaster on a social
political economic and apocalyptic scale
right
[ __ ]
as a feeling and as a word with a
definition nostalgia is relatively
neutral if not entirely inescapable
it's reflexive triggered something that
you can't really control
but as it is now often used to describe
almost predatory tactics used in media
and politics it's hard to really gauge
the use of nostalgia because in spite of
the many ways that nostalgia in media
can be tied to racism misogyny and
bigotry in general i don't feel that
media that allows you to relive the past
is entirely invalid i feel as if the
fact that nostalgia itself is such a
divisive tactic is indicative of the way
that it is controlling our society
whether you love to see it or if you
avoid it the prevalence of nostalgia
both in media and discussion of this
media show me that we are a culture that
is stuck in the past even if we have
conflicts over how the past ought to be
depicted because while it is important
to recognize the tragic and unjust
elements of the past
it's also important to be aware
of what was good about the past two an
entirely pessimistic and bleak depiction
of the past leads us to similar problems
in the instance of queer culture this is
especially true i find some within the
community and allies too put down their
arms in certain situations they see the
progress that is made and feel that
things are progressing towards equal
treatment at an alarming rate what work
needs to be done when things are so much
better than they were 20 years ago it's
hard to help these people
compartmentalize progress and realize
that rights are not a monolith
and while rights may be progressing in
some areas they are regressing in others
to say nothing of the values within the
queer community itself the situation of
our equal treatment
is kind of all over the place
but the way right's progression is
framed in media discussion it makes it
seem like everything is coming up roses
compared to what it used to be this is a
struggle because
a
even if things are better that doesn't
mean things are safe or comfortable b
our rights and community needs are an
evolving shifting landscape that's
largely reactionary to political and
social movements within the hegemony and
see
while certain areas of the queer
experience are improving
others are stagnating if not regressing
rights for some but not for all is a
double-edged sword that has splintered
the queer community and soured
inter-community relations with other
social groups as a for instance
the black panther party used to run
security detail for early pride
demonstrations but a schism developed in
the 90s when the clinton campaign of the
91 primary latched on to a very white
depiction of gay men and women as their
poster children for gay rights didn't
help that gay leaders of the time really
leaned into this whitewashing
and what we got out of it was the
defense of marriage act and don't ask
don't tell which destroyed the lives of
countless gay people who were victims of
predatory recruitment tactics and if
they managed to survive getting shot at
and blown up in iraq and afghanistan
were dishonorably discharged losing
their pensions just as their tour of
service was coming to a close the lesson
we should have learned was to not trust
political bodies that pit us against
each other to play who's the most
moderate among us but a blanket
description of
things are better than they were
doesn't take this nuance into account
it sees the forward-facing rights battle
and views progress based on a reference
of what things were
rather than what things need to be
we are told we should just slow down and
appreciate the rights we already have
or else we won't make any friends a
natural response of anger to obvious
systemic injustice is met with
indifference and annoyance
why say things could be better
when we can just say things could be
worse
and let everyone live their lives tone
policing is a tactic frequently used
against marginalized communities the
privileged who do not necessarily need
to get angry over anything dismiss
whatever we have to say because we are
not saying it in a way that makes them
feel comfortable and god forbid
they feel uncomfortable
what they don't see is how much of our
lives we have spent attempting to do
exactly what they said we should do
engage and debate with civility come to
the table with our hands folded and
follow the proper channels to go about
change and because the greater body of
the population does not see us do that
because we are roundly ignored when we
do all they see is us getting
passionately angry and assume this is an
automatic first response what they see
and what the media depicts us as are
raving lunatics who can't control their
temper and that people who can't control
their emotions may not deserve rights
because in the political climate of
today like in the past some who call
themselves allies would really like to
go back to an era
where we go to our graves
silently
perhaps rather than a tool or device
that creators and producers use to
develop media nostalgia has a clearer
use as a tool we use to analyze that
media instead of presuming direct intent
on the creator's behalf to moralize the
nostalgic depictions we can pinpoint the
ways in which a creator is framing the
past as a whole what message is the
creator trying to convey about the past
what elements are they overlooking in
order to favor others is there any
textual evidence to indicate that they
are deliberately favoring certain
details or is this incidental and are
there any influencing factors like a
publisher network or studio that may be
encouraging a creator to project these
messages
in the end nostalgia isn't a good or a
bad thing it's just a thing
a strange thing
because
it's an emotional feeling for a time
that never really existed
a phantom that clouds our memory with
rose-tinted goggles a defense mechanism
that assures us that surely times
weren't always this bad
once upon a time things were great
but there's a danger in that because it
makes us think that we can make things
great again
but what we remember are the good things
because our minds have a habit of
sanitizing the bad
like i said it's a defense mechanism we
paint over the rot and cracks of the
past
so it looks nice
but that's really all we're doing
painting over it so that we can forget
about it but it's not really gone it's
still there
spreading ever further
while we pretend it doesn't exist
so being nostalgic for the good old days
is fine
but looking at those days uncritically
and wanting to go back to them anyway
basically means we want to return to the
uncomplicated lives we had
as children
when things were simpler and less messy
when politics didn't exist for us
when our biggest worries were about math
tests and hanging out with our friends
but we can't go back to being children
and many of us don't have such fond
uncomplicated memories of childhood
because our childhoods weren't these
rockwell-esque picturescapes of kids on
bikes in small towns
some of our childhoods like the kids on
stranger things
have trauma connected with them abusive
families bullying and the absolute
terror of being rejected by everyone
because of who we are
we remember the good times
but we're seldom allowed to forget the
bad because the bad times shaped us into
who we are now
because we lived through the upside down
of childhood trauma and made it out the
other side we were lucky enough not to
get lost in that dark place
so now we don't want anyone to ever
ever even have to enter it again
we do what we can to keep people aware
of the darkness and by doing so we're
accused of forcing politics into things
others don't see as political
because their uncomplicated nostalgia
allows them to see it as apolitical but
we can't bend to their whims
we can't let nostalgic memory loss take
over our minds we should be nostalgic
for the good times yes because we all
deserve a momentary escape
but we can't let that nostalgia erase
our memories of the bad times the bad
things that have defined our lives just
as much as the good
because if we don't remember the bad if
we don't remember those battles and how
we won
how will we ever win the battles that
have yet to come
because they are coming
and we need to be ready for them
[Music]
you